hello and welcome to the latest episode
of equation stripped where I take some
of the most important equations in Max
and then strip them back layer by layer
so that anyone can understand this time
it's the turn of the wave equation so
this started out as a simple model for
the vibration of a violin string and
eventually led to one of the most
important discoveries in all of physics
the fact that light is a wave the wave
equation has many applications across
all areas of physics and technology and
society and the reason for this is we
basically live in a world of waves so
hearing you're listening to my voice
right now hearing is just your ears
detecting sound waves moving through the
air you're watching this video with your
eyes but seeing it's just your eyes
detecting visible light waves in the
event of an earthquake that is the
result of waves moving through the earth
you've got ships or surfers or even
yourself if you go swimming bobbing up
and down in the ocean that is water
waves and then there's the
electromagnetic spectrum so we have long
waves such as radio waves which are used
for communication and then we start to
move into shorter and shorter
wavelengths so ultraviolet waves which
come from the Sun or x-rays to use to
look inside our body there are also
waves any aspect of science technology
medicine society as a whole it's all to
do with waves and the key is anything
satisfying the wave equation will
exhibit wave-like behavior and therefore
is a wave and that is what makes this
equation so important now we've stripped
back to our second layer and we're going
to talk about what the equation actually
means physically and I'm going to
describe it in terms of the original
formulation so
of a violin string that's been plucked
so how does it vibrate and how does it
move the equation looks at small
segments of the strength rather than the
whole string but if we think what would
the whole string look like so it's a
string is fixed at both ends on your
violin and if you pluck it what would it
do so say it forms some kind of wavy
pattern like this see where your
equations probably going to be waves
anyway this is our plucked string and
then if we zoom in on this segment in
the squack it's sort of a u-shape and
then if we think about dividing this up
into say these three pieces so if this
is the bit that we're concentrating on
in our equation so on the left hand side
we're thinking about the acceleration of
a small segment of strength so let's say
that this central piece is our small
segment of strength and so the
acceleration of that string sort of how
it moves how its velocity how its speed
will change it makes sense that the bits
next to it the neighboring pieces would
affect how this one will move and so all
the term on the right-hand side is
saying is that this acceleration is just
going to be determined by how these two
pieces move so if the two pieces next to
the bit we're interested in sent a bit
the bits either side say they both move
up then the bits in the middle is
probably going to go up so you know it's
acceleration will change if its
direction changes its acceleration
changes or if these two pieces go down
then maybe our central piece will go
down so you can see that whatever the
neighboring segments do will affect the
central segment and the bit that we're
trying to work out the acceleration of
and sort of the physics and the thought
experiment that I've just described here
it's pretty much what the equation is
representing stripping back now to our
third layer we're going to look at
the individual terms in the equation and
also I'm going to introduce you to the
method of scaling analysis which is one
of the most powerful tools in all of
applied maths so to start with let's
begin on the left hand side so the main
thing in our equation that we're trying
to work out in the example of the violin
string is the displacement of our string
so displacement just means the movement
so if you have it at one point and then
it moves that object or the string has
been displaced and we want to work that
out and then here we're taking a second
order time derivative where T represents
time and if you have a displacement or a
position in some sense and you take one
time derivative that is distance over
time which is speed as hopefully we know
and then if you take a speed and do
another time derivative you're trying to
work out how the speed changes over time
so that is acceleration which is why
this term means acceleration and they're
moving onto the right-hand side of our
equation we have two terms so we have
this up side our triangle squared W so
this is the laplacian of W and the
laplacian is a well-defined mathematical
function but basically it involves
second order derivatives of space so
here you have a second order time
derivative and in here you're thinking
second order derivatives in space and
then the final term here is our C
squared
and C is in fact the speed of the wave
and to work out why C is the speed is
where we need scaling analysis the
reason scaling analysis is such a
powerful tool in maths and applied back
in particular is that it allows us to
understand something about the equation
or the problem without actually having
to solve the equation itself so some
equations are incredibly difficult to
solve and require computers or we don't
even know the solutions for example but
with scaling analysis you can sort of
gain an understanding of what's actually
happening in the underlying physics by
Quitely simple method and the key to it
is sort of thinking about what all the
quantities in your equation ah and you
just rewrite your equation in terms of
these quantities so if we start with the
left hand side of our equation what
we've got here is a second time
derivative or two time derivatives of W
so we can write that basically as W
divided by T squared and then looking at
the right hand side of our equation
we've got another W we've got C squared
which I'm going to pretend we don't yet
know his speed and we've got the
laplacian so we can write the C squared
we can write the W and then we have to
think about what the laplacian means so
like here we're taking two time
derivatives of W but the player takes a
second order space derivative so two
space derivatives so if we say L to
represent a space with distance then
what the laplacian is doing is basically
saying we're dividing by distance
squared and so now we've rewritten the
wave equation in terms of some very
simple quantities we know T is time we
know Alice distance and we don't yet
know C but we just rearrange to get C so
this just says that C is actually equal
to ml over T and hopefully you
the distance divided by time speed and
so therefore C is a speed and as we will
see in the next layer C is in fact the
speed of the wave stripping back to the
fourth and final layer of the wave
equation I'm now going to show you why
the solutions to this equation give you
waves and not only do they give you
waves but they actually give you two
waves so you're getting forwards moving
wave and a backwards moving wave and
they both travel at the speed C given in
the equation and this solution was first
done by a French mathematician Dalembert
and he did it for the one-dimensional
case because it's the simplest and so
we're going to do the same Dalembert
strick was very simple and very neat
which is what makes it so clever because
you simply just change variables so
currently our displacement W is in terms
of time and space so W is just a
function of T X but then Dalembert said
well let's change that into a function
of two new variables which we're going
to call
dzifa and eita because we love Greek
letters in Max and to transform the wave
equation our partial differential
equation into the new variables there
are rules that we follow and you just
get a second-order derivative of W I'm
going to write capital W to emphasize
that this is a function of Zeta and ETA
instead of X and T but it's still our
displacement of the string and you get
the second derivative of it in terms of
Zeta and ETA equal to zero
and to solve an equation like this it's
actually quite simple
you just have to think about what when
differentiated with respect to a
variable gives you zero and so the
solution in terms
Zita and each surf rock little W is just
some function of eater plus some other
function of Zeta but of course we want
the solution in terms of little W as a
function of X and T so we have to
substitute back because this form of
solution gives you a forward traveling
wave and a backwards travelling wave
where the speed is given by C this may
all seem a little abstract with these
sort of unknown functions F and G but
there's a reason I kept it so general
the most general solution you can get
has a forward traveling wave and a
backwards travelling wave so in other
words any solution to the wave equation
is a wave and I guess the clue is in the
name all along right waiting equation
but this is really important that any
solution is a wave so thank you
everybody for watching I hope you've
learned something about the wave
equation and how important waves are in
our universe also do check out my
website Tom rocks matcom all my material
is there you can also find me on
Facebook Twitter Instagram at Tom rocks
maths and I will be back next time with
another equation ready to be stripped